Hi again.
Okay we've already laid some of the ground
work with notions like term frequency and
inverse document frequency.
In this segment,
what I want to introduce is properly the
retrieval model of the vector space model.
Which is one of the most commonly
used models of information retrieval
in real systems.
So we saw in the previous segment how we
turn documents into real valued vectors.
And so, we now have a V dimensional vector
space where V is the number
of words now vocabulary.
The terms,
the words are the axis of the space, and
documents you can think of as
either just points in the space or
vectors from the origin
pointing out to those points.
So we now have a very high dimensional
space, tens of millions of dimensions
in a real system when you apply this
such as in a web search engine.
A crucial property of these vectors
is that they're very sparse vectors,
most of the entries are zero
because each individual document
only typically has a few hundred or
a thousand words in it.
So then, if we have this vector
space of documents, how do we handle
querying it when a query comes in, and
the key idea there is that we treat
queries exactly the same way, they're also
going to be vectors in the same space.
And then if we do that,
we can rank documents according to their
proximity to the query in this space.
So proximity corresponds
to similarity of vectors,
and therefore it's roughly
the reverse of distance.
And we're doing this because we want to
get a way from the you're-either-in-or-out
Boolean model and have a relative score as
to how well a document matches a query.
We're going to rank more relevant
documents higher than less relevant
documents.
Let's try and
make that all a bit more precise.
So how can we formalize
proximity in a vector space?
The first attempt is just to take
the distance between two points, that is,
the distance between the end
points of their vectors.
And the standard way to
do that in a vector space
would be Euclidean distance
between the points.
But it turns out Euclidean distance by
itself isn't actually a good idea and
that's because Euclidean distance is
large for vectors of different lengths.
Let me explain what I mean by that.
Let's suppose here is our vector space.
Well, what we're finding is the distance
between here and here is large.
In particular, it's larger than either
the distance here, or the distance there.
But, if we actually think of this in terms
of its information retrieval problem and
look in what's in our space,
that's seems wrong.
In this tiny example the two word actually
shown are here for gossip,
and here, for jealous.
And what our query is, this is
the query that would come out precisely
if your query is gossip and jealous.
So it has both of those words
occurring with equal weight.
Well, if we then look at our documents,
what we find is document one
seems to have a lot to do with gossiping
and nothing to do with jealousy.
And document three has a lot to do with
jealousy and nothing to do With gossiping.
Whereas document two seems just
the kind of document we want to get,
one that has a lot to do with
both gossiping and jealousy.
So the terms in the document d2
are very similar to the ones in q.
So we want to be saying that, that is
actually the most similar document.
And so this suggests a way to solve
this problem and move forward.
And that is,
rather than just talking about distance,
what we want to start looking at
is the angle in the vector space.
So the idea is we can use
angle instead of distance.
So let's, in particular,
motivate that once by considering
this thought experiment.
Suppose that we take a document and append
it to itself giving us a document d prime.
So clearly semantically, d and
d prime have the same content.
They cover the same information.
But if we're just working in a regular
vector space with Euclidean distance,
the distance between the two
documents will be quite large.
And that's because if we had a vector and
this was the vector for d.
And the vector for d prime would be
twice as long pointing out here and
so that we have a quite large
distance between these two vectors.
So we don't want to do that.
Instead, what we want to notice is
that these two vectors are in a line,
so the angle between the two vectors is
zero, corresponding to maximal similarity.
And so the idea is, we're going to
rank documents according to that angle
between the document and the query.
And so
the following two notions are equivalent,
ranking documents in decreasing order
of their angle between the query and
the document and
ranking documents in increasing
order of the cosine of the angle
between the query and the document.
So, I'll go through that in a little
bit more detail, but you'll often
hear the phrase cosine similarity, and
this is what we're introducing here.
And the secret here is just to notice
that cosine is a monotonically
decreasing function for angle between
the interval 0 and 180 degrees.
So here's the cosine which
you should remember.
So if the angle is 0, the cosine of it
is 1 If it's perpendicular 90 degrees,
the cosine is zero, and it can keep
on going right up to 180 degrees and
the cosine is continuing
to descend to minus one.
So essentially, all we need to observe
here is that cosine in a monotonically
decreasing function in
the range of zero to 180 so
therefore cosine score serves
as a kind of inverse of angle.
And, well, that might still
make it seem a rather strange
thing to use, I mean, we could have just
taken the reciprocal of the angle or
the negative of the angle and
that would've also turned things around so
we got a measure of closeness between
documents as a similarity measure.
But it turns out the cosine
measure is actually standard,
because there's actually a very
efficient way to evaluate the cosine of
the angle between documents using vector
arithmetic where we don't actually use
any transcendental functions like cosine
that would take a long time to compute.
So the starting point of going through
this is getting an idea of the length
of a vector and
how to normalize the length of a vector.
So for any vector so we have a vector X.
We can work out the length
of the vector by summing up
each of it's components squared, and then
taking the square root around the outside.
So that if we have something
like a vector that's three four,
what we're going to do is take three
squared nine, four squared 16, and then
add those gives 25,
take the square root, gives five, and
that's the length that the vector, just
like in the standard Pythagorean triangle.
Okay, so if we then take any vector and
divide it by its length, we then get
a unit length vector which you can think
of as a vector that touches the surface
of unit hypersphere around the origin.
Now, if we go back to the example that
we had earlier of two documents, d and
d appended to itself to get d prime.
You can see that these documents,
if they are both length normalized,
will go back to exactly the same position,
and because of that once you length
normalize vectors, long and
short documents have comparable weights.
So the secret of our cosine measure,
is that we do this length normalization.
So here's the cosine similarity
between two documents,
which is the cosine of the angle
between the two documents.
And the way we do that,
is in the numerator,
we calculate here a dot product.
So we're taking the individual
components of the vector here,
component by component, and
multiplying them and taking their sum.
But then the way we do that is that we've
then got this denominator which is
considering the length of the vectors.
And you can write it like this but
actually,
what it's equivalent to is
taking each vector dot and
length normalizing at, and then taking
the dot product of the whole thing
because it's these sort of two parts
you can factor a path as you wish.
And so, written out in full,
it's over here, but we have
the length normalizations on the bottom
and then this sum dot product on the top.
Okay, where each of these elements, q i is
a tf-idf weight of term i in the query,
and d i is the tf-idf weight
of the term in the document.
In particular, what we might want
to do is actually length normalize
our document vectors in advance and
length normalize our cosine
Length-normalize our query
vector once the query comes in.
And if we do that this
cosine similarity measure
is simply the dot product of
length-normalized vectors.
And so
we're simply just taking this sum here
in the vector space where,
as we discussed before,
in reality we won't do it over all
elements of the vector, we'll just do it
over the terms in
the vocabulary that are in
the intersection of ones that
appear in q and the document.
So going back to the kind
of picture we had before,
we now again have our vector
space which again we're showing
with just two axes here to keep it
viewable, which are now poor and
rich and
we can take any document vector and
we can map it down to unit length
by doing this length normalization.
And when we do that, we get all
document vectors being vectors that
touch the surface of this unit hyposphere,
which is just a circle in two dimensions.
And so then we want to order
documents by a similarity by a query.
We take this query here, and
we're working out the angle,
or the cosine of the angle
to other documents.
So, in particular the cosine will
be highest the small angles.
So, if we order these documents in
terms of the cosine of the angle.
The document will be d2, then it
will be d1, and then it will be d3.
Okay, let's now go through this concretely
with an example so In this example,
what we have is three novels
of Jane Austen's, and
we are going to represent them in
the vector space, length normalized, and
then we're going to work out the cosign
similarity between the different novels.
So in other words, in this example, there
isn't exactly any query vector, we're just
working out the similarity between the
different novels that are our documents.
So the starting off point
is starting with these
term frequency count vectors for
the different novels.
And so what we can see is
affection is one of Jane Austen's favorite
words that appears frequently every novel.
The word wuthering only
occurs in Wuthering Heights.
And then other words like jealous and
gossip occur occasionally.
And so this is going to be our
vocabulary for this example that I give.
And what we're going to want to do is
take these term frequency vectors and
turn them into length normalized
vectors on the unit hyper sphere.
Now for this example,
I'm just going to use tone frequency
weighting to keep it a bit simpler.
Let's see what happens on the next slide.
Okay so here we have done log frequency
weighting of the kind we saw before.
So what were the 0s, say 0, and
then where you have your mapping down so
again a weighting of 3 for
the number of times that affection
appears in Sense and Sensibility.
But these vectors aren't yet
of the same length.
This is clearly the longest
of the vectors.
So the next step is to
length normalize them.
So now here are the length normalize
vectors for three documents.
You can see how this vector
has gone much shorter
than it was here by scaling it down.
And the property that we have for
each of these vectors for
their being length normalized is
that if you took this quantity
squared plus this quantity squared plus
this quantity squared, you would get one.
And, therefore, the square root
of that sum would also be one.
So the length one vector.
So, given that they're length one vectors,
we can then calculate cosine
similarities as simply the doc product
between the vectors, so
let's see what happens when we do that.
Okay, so then we have the cosine
similarity between Sense and
Sensibility and Price and Prejudice.
Is taking these pairwise products and
summing them together.
And it gives us a cosine
similarity of 0.94.
So they're very similar.
And then we can do it for the other
cases and what we see that the Sense and
Sensibility and
Wuthering Heights is 0.79, and for
the final pair, this too, it's 0.69.
And the thing that we might wonder is,
why do we have that the cosine
similarity of Sense and
Sensibility and Pride and
Prejudice Is higher than that for sense
and sensibility and border and heights.
And so we can try and look at that so
we can comparing this one with
the other two and what we can see is
this part of the bordering height
factor doesn't help at all in producing
similarity with sense and sensibility.
The biggest component in the Sense and
Sensibility vector is this one and so
that generates a lot of similarity
with Pride and Prejudice,
which also has that word
very prominently represented
where that word is less
represented in Wuthering Heights.
And so therefore, this dot product here,
that this term in the dot product is much
larger and so we get greater similarity.
And so you can see there that if the ratio
of occurrence of different words
in the document has a big effect
in measuring overall similarity.
Okay, I hope that example helped to make
it more specific and that you now have
a good idea of what the Vector Space Model
in information retrieval is.
Its the idea that we
can make documents for
retrieval based on their similarity of
angles and high dimensional vector space.